G.R. No. 197058, October 14, 2015

GREGORY BALUYO Y GAMORA, FOR AND IN BEHALF OF EMMANUEL GAMORA BALUYO, Petitioner, v. SPOUSES JOAQUIN AND REBECCA DE LA CRUZ, Respondents.




OUR RULING

We find the petition meritorious.

Proof of prior physical possession is an indispensable element in a forcible entry case.24 Section 1, Rule 7025 of the Revised Rules of Court requires that, in actions for forcible entry, the plaintiff must allege that he has been deprived of the possession of any land or building by force, intimidation, threat, strategy, or stealth. This requirement implies that the defendant's possession of the property is unlawful from the beginning, as he acquires possession by unlawful means. The plaintiff must prove that he was in prior physical possession of the property in litigation until he was deprived thereof by the defendant.26

We have ruled that a party who has prior physical possession, regardless of the character of his possession, can recover possession even against the owner of the property.27 The law protects the party in peaceful, quiet possession from being thrown out by a strong hand, terror or violence;28 such party is entitled to remain on the property until he is lawfully ejected by a person having a better right.29

In ejectment cases, such as in forcible entry, the only question to be resolved is who between the contending parties is entitled to the physical or material possession of the property involved, independent of any claim of ownership set forth by the parties-litigants.30 In ejectment cases, possession means nothing more than actual physical possession (possession de facto),31 it is not juridical possession (possession de jure), which gives the transferee a right over the thing that he may set up even against the owner.32 Thus, "an ejectment case will not necessarily be decided in favor of one who has presented proof of ownership of the subject property."33

Issues regarding the validity of title to property can be assailed only in an action expressly instituted for that specific purpose,34 either in an accion publiciana or accion reivindicatoria. A forcible entry action such as the present case, which by nature is an accion interdictal, is merely a quieting process and never determines actual title to an estate.35

However, where the issue of ownership is raised by any of the parties to an ejectment case, the courts may provisionally pass upon the same in order to determine who has the better right to possess the property. We stress that the adjudication of the issue of ownership is merely provisional and would not bar or prejudice an action between the same parties involving title to the property.36

The parties in this case anchor their right of physical or material possession on their respective claims of ownership. The petitioner asserts ownership over the subject property based on the Deed of Absolute Sale executed in his favor on November 30, 1999. On the other hand, the respondents claim ownership of the subject property based on the fact that respondent Rebecca is the sole heir of her father Bonifacio, who was the holder of a certificate of title over the property. Bonifacio died in July 2007.37

To defeat the petitioner's claim, the respondents attack the validity and due execution of the deed of absolute sale. They suggest that the subject deed is most likely a forgery because, in another deed of absolute sale between Bonifacio Dimaano and Emmanuel Baluyo involving a different property, the National Bureau of Investigation has found Bonifacio's signature therein as forged. They question why the subject deed only surfaced nine (9) years after its alleged execution. Also, they allege that the subject deed was not notarized.38

After a careful review of the records, however, we find that the subject deed of sale was apparently notarized. Attached to the records of the case is a copy of the November 30, 1999 Deed of Sale, notarized by a certain Atty. Leoncio F. Elopre.39

We find that the respondents' evidence and arguments fail to overcome the presumption of regularity accorded to the petitioner's notarized deed of absolute sale.40 The settled rule is that a notarized document enjoys the presumption of regularity and is conclusive as to the truthfulness of its contents.41

While there is evidence to suggest that the petitioner had allegedly been involved in a past forgery, we cannot consider such evidence to nullify the present deed of absolute sale between the petitioner and the spouses Dimaano, as it refers to a different sale transaction for another property, albeit involving the same parties. Thus, in the absence of clear and convincing proof to the contrary, the subject notarized deed of absolute sale is presumed to be valid and duly executed.

The presence of the subject deed of absolute sale well supports the claim that the petitioner has had physical possession of the subject property since the date of its execution for beginning November 30, 1999. The petitioner's claim is further strengthened by affidavits of witnesses attesting to the fact that Emmanuel Baluyo and his caretaker Gregory Baluyo had previously possessed and occupied the subject residential house which was leased to a certain Kagawad Edzel Severo and subsequently, to Lourdes Perico. The petitioner, therefore, enjoys priority in time of possession compared to the respondents who have never been in actual possession, and based on their claim, would have inherited the subject property only upon Bonifacio's death in July 2007.

On the issue that the identity of the actual portion of land conveyed to the petitioner was not established, we find that the CA committed a reversible error in ruling that the property involved in this case had not been sufficiently identified by the petitioner.

We note that the respondents never questioned before the lower courts the identity of the half-portion of the land claimed by the petitioner. From the very start, the parties were clear as to the identity of the property involved in the forcible entry case.

We discern from the records that the spouses Bonifacio and Consolacion Dimaano were the original owners of the 428.27 sq.m. residential house and lot in Barangay San Pablo, Calabanga, Camarines Sur. The petitioner, his brother Gregory and mother Crisanta who is Consolacion's sister, moved into the property together with the spouses Dimaano and respondent Rebecca. When the spouses separated in 1999, a fence was built separating the property in half. Since then, Bonifacio, during his lifetime, had lived and resided on his half of the property.

It is undisputed that the respondents now occupy half of the 428.27-sq.m. property and in fact are title-holders to this half. Thus, the half-portion conveyed to the petitioner under the subject deed of absolute sale could only refer to the remaining half-portion of the lot covered by OCT No. 31756 that is still under Bonifacio's name.

We reiterate that our pronouncement in this case on the issue of ownership is merely provisional and only for the purpose of resolving the issue of who between the parties has the right of possession of the subject property. The petitioner or the respondents may still question the validity of the documents used by the other party to support their claim of ownership, and to recover possession and ownership of the subject property in a proper suit.

WHEREFORE, we GRANT the petition for review on certiorari and REVERSE and SET ASIDE the October 22, 2010 decision and May 9, 2011 resolution of the Court of Appeals in CA-G.R. SP No. 111755.

Accordingly, the October 22, 2009 decision of the Regional Trial Court of Calabanga, Camarines Sur, in Civil Case No. RTC 09-239, which affirmed the February 26, 2009 decision of the Municipal Trial Court of Calabanga, Camarines Sur, is hereby REINSTATED.

Costs against the respondents.

SO ORDERED.chanroblesvirtuallawlibrary
