G.R. No. 154017 December 8, 2003 - DESAMPARADOS M. SOLIVA v. INTESTATE ESTATE of MARCELO M. VILLALBA, ET AL.:


[G.R. No. 154017. December 8, 2003.]

DESAMPARADOS M. SOLIVA, Substituted by Sole Heir PERLITA SOLIVA GALDO, Petitioner, 
v. The INTESTATE ESTATE of MARCELO M. VILLALBA and VALENTA BALICUA VILLALBA, Respondents.


The Court’s Ruling


The Petition is partly meritorious.

First Issue:chanrob1es virtual 1aw library

Petitioner’s Claim Already Barred

Petitioner contests the appellate court’s finding that she slept on her rights for 16 years and thereby allowed prescription and laches to set in and bar her claim. She avers that she undertook extrajudicial measures to collect the unpaid balance of the purchase price from the Villalbas. She also emphasizes that as a result of her original action, the trial court restored her to the possession of the disputed house and lot on March 26, 1984.

It is readily apparent that petitioner is raising issues of fact that have amply been ruled upon by the appellate court. The CA’s findings of fact are generally binding upon this Court and will not be disturbed on appeal — especially when, as in this case, they are the same as those of the trial court. 8 Petitioner has failed to show sufficient reason for us to depart from this rule. Accordingly, we shall review only questions of law that have been distinctly set forth. 9

No Invalidation of Sale Due to Nonpayment of Full Price

Petitioner argues that the transaction between the parties was a contract to sell rather than a contract of sale. This argument was properly brushed aside by the appellate court, which held that she was bound by her admission in her Complaint 10 and during the hearings 11 that she had sold the property to the Villalbas.

Petitioner further contends that the oral contract of sale between the parties was invalid, because the late Captain Marcelo Villalba and his wife had failed to comply with their obligation to pay in full the purchase price of the house and lot. She is mistaken.

Under Article 1318 of the Civil Code, the following are the essential requisites of a valid contract: 1) the consent of the contracting parties, 2) the object certain which is the subject matter of the contract, and 3) the cause of the obligation which is established. When all the essential requisites are present, a contract is obligatory in whatever form it may have been entered into, save in cases where the law requires that it be in a specific form to be valid and enforceable. 12

With respect to real property, Article 1358(1) of the Civil Code specifically requires that a contract of sale thereof be in a public document. However, an otherwise unenforceable oral contract of sale of realty under Article 1403(2) of the Civil Code may be ratified by the failure to object to the presentation of oral evidence to prove it or by the acceptance of benefits granted by it. 13

All the essential elements of a valid contract are present in this case. No issue was raised by petitioner on this point. Moreover, while the contract between the parties might have been unenforceable under Article 1403(2) of the Civil Code, the admission 14 by petitioner that she had accepted payments under the oral contract of sale took the case out of the scope of the Statute of Frauds. 15 The ratification of the contract rendered it valid and enforceable.

Furthermore, contrary to petitioner’s submission, the nonpayment of the full consideration did not invalidate the contract of sale. Under settled doctrine, nonpayment is a resolutory condition that extinguishes the transaction existing for a time and discharges the obligations created thereunder. 16 The remedy of the unpaid seller is to sue for collection 17 or, in case of a substantial breach, to rescind the contract. 18 These alternative remedies of specific performance and rescission are provided under Article 1191 of the Civil Code as follows:jgc:chanrobles.com.ph

"Art. 1191. The power to rescind obligations is implied in reciprocal ones, in case one of the obligors should not comply with what is incumbent upon him.cralaw : red

"The injured party may choose between fulfillment and the rescission of the obligation, with the payment of damages in either case. He may also seek rescission even after he has chosen fulfillment, if the latter should become impossible.

"The Court shall decree the rescission claimed, unless there be just cause authorizing the fixing of a period.

"x       x       x."cralaw virtua1aw library

The rescission of a sale of immovables, on the other hand, is governed by Article 1592 of the Civil Code as follows:jgc:chanrobles.com.ph

"Article 1592. In the sale of immovable property, even though it may have been stipulated that upon failure to pay the price at the time agreed upon the rescission of the contract shall of right take place, the vendee may pay, even after the expiration of the period, as long as no demand for rescission of the contract has been made upon him either judicially or extrajudicially or by a notarial act. After the demand, the court may not grant him a new term."cralaw virtua1aw library

Upon the facts found by the trial and the appellate courts, petitioner did not exercise her right either to seek specific performance or to rescind the verbal contract of sale until May 1982, when she filed her complaint for recovery of ownership and possession of the property. This factual finding brings to the fore the question of whether by 1982, she was already barred from recovering the property due to laches and prescription.

Action Barred by Laches

In general, laches is the failure or neglect, for an unreasonable and unexplained length of time, to do that which — by the exercise of due diligence — could or should have been done earlier. 19 It is the negligence or omission to assert a right within a reasonable period, warranting the presumption that the party entitled to assert it has either abandoned or declined to assert it. 20

Under this time-honored doctrine, relief has been denied to litigants who, by sleeping on their rights for an unreasonable length of time — either by negligence, folly or inattention — have allowed their claims to become stale. 21 Vigilantibus, sed non dormientibus, jura subveniunt. The laws aid the vigilant, not those who slumber on their rights. 22

The following are the essential elements of laches:chanrob1es virtual 1aw library

(1) Conduct on the part of the defendant that gave rise to the situation complained of; or the conduct of another which the defendant claims gave rise to the same;

(2) Delay by the complainant in asserting his right after he has had knowledge of the defendant’s conduct and after he has had an opportunity to sue;

(3) Lack of knowledge by or notice to the defendant that the complainant will assert the right on which he bases his suit; and

(4) Injury or prejudice to the defendant in the event relief is accorded to the complainant. 23

Petitioner complied with her obligation to deliver the property in 1966. 24 However, respondent’s husband failed to comply with his reciprocal obligation to pay, when the money he had been expecting from Manila never materialized. 25 He also failed to make further installments after May 13, 1966. 26 As early as 1966, therefore, petitioner already had the right to compel payment or to ask for rescission, pursuant to Article 1169 of the Civil Code, which reads:jgc:chanrobles.com.ph

"Art. 1169. Those obliged to deliver or to do something incur in delay from the time the obligee judicially or extrajudicially demands from them the fulfillment of their obligation.

"However, the demand by the creditor shall not be necessary in order that delay may exist:chanrob1es virtua1 1aw 1ibrary

x       x       x


"In reciprocal obligations, neither party incurs in delay if the other does not comply or is not ready to comply in a proper manner with what is incumbent upon him. From the moment one of the parties fulfills his obligation, delay by the other begins." (Emphasis supplied)

Nonetheless, petitioner failed to sue for collection or rescission. Due to insufficiency of evidence, the lower courts brushed aside her assertions that she had availed herself of extrajudicial remedies to collect the balance or to serve an extrajudicial demand on Villalba, prior to her legal action in 1982. Meanwhile, respondent had spent a considerable sum in renovating the house and introducing improvements on the premises. 27

In view thereof, the appellate court aptly ruled that petitioner’s claim was already barred by laches. It has been consistently held that laches does not concern itself with the character of the defendant’s title, but only with the issue of whether or not the plaintiff — by reason of long inaction or inexcusable neglect — should be barred entirely from asserting the claim, because to allow such action would be inequitable and unjust to the defendant. 28

Likewise, it must be stressed that unlike prescription, laches is not concerned merely with the fact of delay, but even more with the effect of unreasonable delay. 29 In Vda. de Cabrera v. CA, 30 we explained:jgc:chanrobles.com.ph

"In our jurisdiction, it is an enshrined rule that even a registered owner of property may be barred from recovering possession of property by virtue of laches. Under the Land Registration Act (now the Property Registration Decree), no title to registered land in derogation to that of the registered owner shall be acquired by prescription or adverse possession. The same is not true with regard to laches. As we have stated earlier in Mejia de Lucas v. Gamponia, while the defendant may not be considered as having acquired title by virtue of his and his predecessor’s long continued possession (37 years) the original owner’s right to recover . . . the possession of the property and the title thereto from the defendant has, by the latter’s long period of possession and by patentee’s inaction and neglect, been converted into a stale demand." 31

The contention of petitioner that her right to recover is imprescriptible because the property was registered under the Torrens system 32 also fails to convince us. It was the finding of the trial court that the property was not yet covered by a free patent on January 4, 1966, when Captain Villalba acquired possession thereof. Indeed, the evidence shows that as of that date, the documents relating to the property were still in the name of Pilar Castrence, from whom petitioner purchased the property on April 27, 1966; 33 that she applied for a free patent therefor between January 4 and April 27, 1966; 34 and that the original certificate of title over the lot was issued to her under Free Patent No. (x-1) 3732 only on August 16, 1974. 35

It is apparent, then, that petitioner sold the house and lot to respondent on January 4, 1966, before she had even acquired the title to convey it. Moreover, she applied for a free patent after she lost, by operation of law, 36 the title she had belatedly acquired from Castrence. These circumstances raise serious questions over the former’s good faith in delaying the assertion of her rights to the property. They bar her from seeking relief under the principle that "one who comes to court must come with clean hands." 37

Action Barred by Prescription

Moreover, we find that the RTC and the CA correctly appreciated the operation of ordinary acquisitive prescription in respondent’s favor. To acquire ownership and other real rights over immovables under Article 1134 of the Civil Code, possession must be for 10 years. It must also be in good faith and with just title. 38

Good faith consists of the reasonable belief that the person from whom the possessor received the thing was its owner, but could not transmit the ownership thereof. 39 On the other hand, there is just title when the adverse claimant came into possession of the property through one of the modes recognized by law for the acquisition of ownership or other real rights, but the grantor was not the owner or could not transmit any right. 40

The RTC and the CA held that the Villalbas’ had continuously possessed the property from January 4, 1966 until May 5, 1982 41 or for a total of 16 years. Capt. Villalba came into possession through a sale by petitioner, whom he believed was the owner, though — at the time of the sale — she was not. Clearly, all the elements of ordinary acquisitive prescription were present.

Petitioner is thus precluded from invoking the 30-year prescriptive period for commencing real action over immovables. Prescription of the action is without prejudice to acquisitive prescription, according to Article 1141 of the Civil Code, which we quote:jgc:chanrobles.com.ph

"Art. 1141. Real actions over immovables prescribe after thirty years.chanrob1es virtua1 1aw 1ibrary

"This provision is without prejudice to what is established for the acquisition of ownership and other real rights by prescription." (Emphasis supplied)

Second Issue:chanrob1es virtual 1aw library

Unjust Enrichment

While petitioner is now barred from recovering the subject property, all is not lost for her. By Respondent Villalba’s own admission, 42 a balance of P1,250 of the total purchase price remains unpaid. Reason and fairness suggest that petitioner be allowed to collect this sum. It is a basic rule in law that no one shall unjustly enrich oneself at the expense of another. Niguno non deue enriquecerse tortizamente condaño de otro. For indeed, to allow respondent to keep the property without paying fully for it amounts to unjust enrichment on her part.

Since the obligation consists of the payment of a sum of money, and Respondent Villalba has incurred delay in satisfying that obligation, legal interest at six percent (6%) per annum 43 is hereby imposed on the balance of P1,250, to be computed starting May 5, 1982 — when the claim was made judicially — until the finality of this Court’s judgment. Following our ruling in Eastern Shipping Lines, Inc. v. CA, 44 the sum so awarded shall likewise bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the time this judgment becomes final and executory until its satisfaction.

WHEREFORE, the Petition is partly GRANTED. The Decision of the Court of Appeals is AFFIRMED, with the MODIFICATION that respondent is ordered to pay the balance of the purchase price of P1,250 plus 6 percent interest per annum, from May 5, 1982 until the finality of this judgment. Thereafter, interest of 12 percent per year shall then be imposed on that amount upon the finality of this Decision until the payment thereof. No costs.

SO ORDERED.