G.R. No. 164195 : October 12, 2010 APO FRUITS CORPORATION and HIJO PLANTATION, INC., Petitioners, v. LAND BANK OF THE PHILIPPINES, Respondent.cralaw:


G.R. No. 164195 : October 12, 2010

APO FRUITS CORPORATION and HIJO PLANTATION, INC., Petitioners, v. LAND BANK OF THE PHILIPPINES, Respondent.cralaw



The Courts Ruling


We find the petitioners arguments meritorious and accordingly GRANT the present motion for reconsideration.

Just compensation a Basic Limitation on the States

Power of Eminent Domain

At the heart of the present controversy is the Third Divisions December 19, 2007 Resolution which held that the petitioners are not entitled to 12% interest on the balance of the just compensation belatedly paid by the LBP. In the presently assailed December 4, 2009 Resolution, we affirmed the December 19, 2007 Resolutions findings that: (a) the LBP deposited "pertinent amounts" in favor of the petitioners within fourteen months after they filed their complaint for determination of just compensation; and (b) the LBP had already paid the petitioners P411,769,168.32. We concluded then that these circumstances refuted the petitioners assertion of unreasonable delay on the part of the LBP.

A re-evaluation of the circumstances of this case and the parties arguments, viewed in light of the just compensation requirement in the exercise of the States inherent power of eminent domain, compels us to re-examine our findings and conclusions.


Eminent domain is the power of the State to take private property for public use.3cra1aw It is an inherent power of State as it is a power necessary for the States existence; it is a power the State cannot do without.4cra1aw As an inherent power, it does not need at all to be embodied in the Constitution; if it is mentioned at all, it is solely for purposes of limiting what is otherwise an unlimited power. The limitation is found in the Bill of Rights5cra1aw that part of the Constitution whose provisions all aim at the protection of individuals against the excessive exercise of governmental powers.

Section 9, Article III of the 1987 Constitution (which reads "No private property shall be taken for public use without just compensation.") provides two essential limitations to the power of eminent domain, namely, that (1) the purpose of taking must be for public use and (2) just compensation must be given to the owner of the private property.

It is not accidental that Section 9 specifies that compensation should be "just" as the safeguard is there to ensure a balance property is not to be taken for public use at the expense of private interests; the public, through the State, must balance the injury that the taking of property causes through compensation for what is taken, value for value.

Nor is it accidental that the Bill of Rights is interpreted liberally in favor of the individual and strictly against the government. The protection of the individual is the reason for the Bill of Rights being; to keep the exercise of the powers of government within reasonable bounds is what it seeks.6chanroblesvirtuallawlibrary

The concept of "just compensation" is not new to Philippine constitutional law,7cra1aw but is not original to the Philippines; it is a transplant from the American Constitution.8cra1aw It found fertile application in this country particularly in the area of agrarian reform where the taking of private property for distribution to landless farmers has been equated to the "public use" that the Constitution requires. In Land Bank of the Philippines v. Orilla,9cra1aw a valuation case under our agrarian reform law, this Court had occasion to state:chanroblesvirtualawlibrary

Constitutionally, "just compensation" is the sum equivalent to the market value of the property, broadly described as the price fixed by the seller in open market in the usual and ordinary course of legal action and competition, or the fair value of the property as between the one who receives and the one who desires to sell, it being fixed at the time of the actual taking by the government. Just compensation is defined as the full and fair equivalent of the property taken from its owner by the expropriator. It has been repeatedly stressed by this Court that the true measure is not the taker's gain but the owner's loss. The word "just" is used to modify the meaning of the word "compensation" to convey the idea that the equivalent to be given for the property to be taken shall be real, substantial, full and ample.10cra1aw [Emphasis supplied.]


In the present case, while the DAR initially valued the petitioners landholdings at a total of P251,379,104.02,11cra1aw the RTC, acting as a special agrarian court, determined the actual value of the petitioners landholdings to be P1,383,179,000.00. This valuation, a finding of fact, has subsequently been affirmed by this Court, and is now beyond question. In eminent domain terms, this amount is the "real, substantial, full and ample" compensation the government must pay to be "just" to the landowners.

Significantly, this final judicial valuation is far removed from the initial valuation made by the DAR; their values differ by P1,131,799,897.00 in itself a very substantial sum that is roughly four times the original DAR valuation. We mention these valuations as they indicate to us how undervalued the petitioners lands had been at the start, particularly at the time the petitioners landholdings were "taken". This reason apparently compelled the petitioners to relentlessly pursue their valuation claims all they way up to the level of this Court.

While the LBP deposited the total amount of P71,891,256.62 into the petitioners accounts (P26,409,549.86 for AFC and P45,481,706.76 for HPI) at the time the landholdings were taken, these amounts were mere partial payments that only amounted to 5% of the P1,383,179,000.00 actual value of the expropriated properties. We point this aspect out to show that the initial payments made by the LBP when the petitioners landholdings were taken, although promptly withdrawn by the petitioners, could not by any means be considered a fair exchange of values at the time of taking; in fact, the LBPs actual deposit could not be said to be substantial even from the original LBP valuation of P251,379,103.90.

Thus, the deposits might have been sufficient for purposes of the immediate taking of the landholdings but cannot be claimed as amounts that would excuse the LBP from the payment of interest on the unpaid balance of the compensation due. As discussed at length below, they were not enough to compensate the petitioners for the potential income the landholdings could have earned for them if no immediate taking had taken place. Under the circumstances, the State acted oppressively and was far from "just" in their position to deny the petitioners of the potential income that the immediate taking of their properties entailed.

Just Compensation from the Prism of the Element of Taking.

Apart from the requirement that compensation for expropriated land must be fair and reasonable, compensation, to be "just," must also be made without delay.12cra1aw Without prompt payment, compensation cannot be considered "just" if the property is immediately taken as the property owner suffers the immediate deprivation of both his land and its fruits or income.

This is the principle at the core of the present case where the petitioners were made to wait for more than a decade after the taking of their property before they actually received the full amount of the principal of the just compensation due them.13cra1aw What they have not received to date is the income of their landholdings corresponding to what they would have received had no uncompensated taking of these lands been immediately made. This income, in terms of the interest on the unpaid principal, is the subject of the current litigation.

We recognized in Republic v. Court of Appeals14cra1aw the need for prompt payment and the necessity of the payment of interest to compensate for any delay in the payment of compensation for property already taken. We ruled in this case that:chanroblesvirtualawlibrary

The constitutional limitation of "just compensation" is considered to be the sum equivalent to the market value of the property, broadly described to be the price fixed by the seller in open market in the usual and ordinary course of legal action and competition or the fair value of the property as between one who receives, and one who desires to sell, i[f] fixed at the time of the actual taking by the government. Thus, if property is taken for public use before compensation is deposited with the court having jurisdiction over the case, the final compensation must include interest[s] on its just value to be computed from the time the property is taken to the time when compensation is actually paid or deposited with the court. In fine, between the taking of the property and the actual payment, legal interest[s] accrue in order to place the owner in a position as good as (but not better than) the position he was in before the taking occurred.15cra1aw [Emphasis supplied.]

Aside from this ruling, Republic notably overturned the Courts previous ruling in National Power Corporation v. Angas16cra1aw which held that just compensation due for expropriated properties is not a loan or forbearance of money but indemnity for damages for the delay in payment; since the interest involved is in the nature of damages rather than earnings from loans, then Art. 2209 of the Civil Code, which fixes legal interest at 6%, shall apply.

In Republic, the Court recognized that the just compensation due to the landowners for their expropriated property amounted to an effective forbearance on the part of the State. Applying the Eastern Shipping Lines ruling,17cra1aw the Court fixed the applicable interest rate at 12% per annum, computed from the time the property was taken until the full amount of just compensation was paid, in order to eliminate the issue of the constant fluctuation and inflation of the value of the currency over time. In the Courts own words:chanroblesvirtualawlibrary

The Bulacan trial court, in its 1979 decision, was correct in imposing interest[s] on the zonal value of the property to be computed from the time petitioner instituted condemnation proceedings and "took" the property in September 1969. This allowance of interest on the amount found to be the value of the property as of the time of the taking computed, being an effective forbearance, at 12% per annum should help eliminate the issue of the constant fluctuation and inflation of the value of the currency over time.18cra1aw [Emphasis supplied.]

We subsequently upheld Republics 12% per annum interest rate on the unpaid expropriation compensation in the following cases: Reyes v. National Housing Authority,19cra1aw Land Bank of the Philippines v. Wycoco,20cra1aw Republic v. Court of Appeals,21cra1aw Land Bank of the Philippines v. Imperial,22cra1aw Philippine Ports Authority v. Rosales-Bondoc,23cra1aw and Curata v. Philippine Ports Authority.24chanroblesvirtuallawlibrary

These were the established rulings that stood before this Court issued the currently assailed Resolution of December 4, 2009. These would be the rulings this Court shall reverse and de-establish if we maintain and affirm our ruling deleting the 12% interest on the unpaid balance of compensation due for properties already taken.

Under the circumstances of the present case, we see no compelling reason to depart from the rule that Republic firmly established. Let it be remembered that shorn of its eminent domain and social justice aspects, what the agrarian land reform program involves is the purchase by the government, through the LBP, of agricultural lands for sale and distribution to farmers. As a purchase, it involves an exchange of values the landholdings in exchange for the LBPs payment. In determining the just compensation for this exchange, however, the measure to be borne in mind is not the taker's gain but the owner's loss25cra1aw since what is involved is the takeover of private property under the States coercive power. As mentioned above, in the value-for-value exchange in an eminent domain situation, the State must ensure that the individual whose property is taken is not shortchanged and must hence carry the burden of showing that the "just compensation" requirement of the Bill of Rights is satisfied.

The owners loss, of course, is not only his property but also its income-generating potential. Thus, when property is taken, full compensation of its value must immediately be paid to achieve a fair exchange for the property and the potential income lost. The just compensation is made available to the property owner so that he may derive income from this compensation, in the same manner that he would have derived income from his expropriated property. If full compensation is not paid for property taken, then the State must make up for the shortfall in the earning potential immediately lost due to the taking, and the absence of replacement property from which income can be derived; interest on the unpaid compensation becomes due as compliance with the constitutional mandate on eminent domain and as a basic measure of fairness.

In the context of this case, when the LBP took the petitioners landholdings without the corresponding full payment, it became liable to the petitioners for the income the landholdings would have earned had they not immediately been taken from the petitioners. What is interesting in this interplay, under the developments of this case, is that the LBP, by taking landholdings without full payment while holding on at the same time to the interest that it should have paid, effectively used or retained funds that should go to the landowners and thereby took advantage of these funds for its own account.

From this point of view, the December 19, 2007 Resolution deleting the award of 12% interest is not only patently and legally wrong, but is also morally unconscionable for being grossly unfair and unjust. If the interest on the just compensation due in reality the equivalent of the fruits or income of the landholdings would have yielded had these lands not been taken would be denied, the result is effectively a confiscatory action by this Court in favor of the LBP. We would be allowing the LBP, for twelve long years, to have free use of the interest that should have gone to the landowners. Otherwise stated, if we continue to deny the petitioners present motion for reconsideration, we would illogically and without much thought to the fairness that the situation demands uphold the interests of the LBP, not only at the expense of the landowners but also that of substantial justice as well.

Lest this Court be a party to this monumental unfairness in a social program aimed at fostering balance in our society, we now have to ring the bell that we have muted in the past, and formally declare that the LBPs position is legally and morally wrong. To do less than this is to leave the demands of the constitutional just compensation standard (in terms of law) and of our own conscience (in terms of morality) wanting and unsatisfied.

The Delay in Payment Issue

Separately from the demandability of interest because of the failure to fully pay for property already taken, a recurring issue in the case is the attribution of the delay.

That delay in payment occurred is not and cannot at all be disputed. While the LBP claimed that it made initial payments of P411,769,168.32 (out of the principal sum due of P1,383,179,000.00), the undisputed fact is that the petitioners were deprived of their lands on December 9, 1996 (when titles to their landholdings were cancelled and transferred to the Republic of the Philippines), and received full payment of the principal amount due them only on May 9, 2008.

In the interim, they received no income from their landholdings because these landholdings had been taken. Nor did they receive adequate income from what should replace the income potential of their landholdings because the LBP refused to pay interest while withholding the full amount of the principal of the just compensation due by claiming a grossly low valuation. This sad state continued for more than a decade. In any language and by any measure, a lengthy delay in payment occurred.

An important starting point in considering attribution for the delay is that the petitioners voluntarily offered to sell their landholdings to the governments land reform program; they themselves submitted their Voluntary Offer to Sell applications to the DAR, and they fully cooperated with the governments program. The present case therefore is not one where substantial conflict arose on the issue of whether expropriation is proper; the petitioners voluntarily submitted to expropriation and surrendered their landholdings, although they contested the valuation that the government made.

Presumably, had the landholdings been properly valued, the petitioners would have accepted the payment of just compensation and there would have been no need for them to go to the extent of filing a valuation case. But, as borne by the records, the petitioners lands were grossly undervalued by the DAR, leaving the petitioners with no choice but to file actions to secure what is justly due them.

The DARs initial gross undervaluation started the cycle of court actions that followed, where the LBP eventually claimed that it could not be faulted for seeking judicial recourse to defend the governments and its own interests in light of the petitioners valuation claims. This LBP claim, of course, conveniently forgets that at the root of all these valuation claims and counterclaims was the initial gross undervaluation by DAR that the LBP stoutly defended. At the end, this undervaluation was proven incorrect by no less than this Court; the petitioners were proven correct in their claim, and the correct valuation more than five-fold the initial DAR valuation was decreed and became final.

All these developments cannot now be disregarded and reduced to insignificance. In blunter terms, the government and the LBP cannot now be heard to claim that they were simply protecting their interests when they stubbornly defended their undervalued positions before the courts. The more apt and accurate statement is that they adopted a grossly unreasonable position and the adverse developments that followed, particularly the concomitant delay, should be directly chargeable to them.

To be sure, the petitioners were not completely correct in the legal steps they took in their valuation claims. They initially filed their valuation claim before the DARAB instead of immediately seeking judicial intervention. The DARAB, however, contributed its share to the petitioners error when it failed or refused to act on the valuation petitions for more than three (3) years. Thus, on top of the DAR undervaluation was the DARAB inaction after the petitioners landholdings had been taken. This Courts Decision of February 6, 2007 duly noted this and observed:chanroblesvirtualawlibrary

It is not controverted that this case started way back on 12 October 1995, when AFC and HPI voluntarily offered to sell the properties to the DAR. In view of the failure of the parties to agree on the valuation of the properties, the Complaint for Determination of Just Compensation was filed before the DARAB on 14 February 1997. Despite the lapse of more than three years from the filing of the complaint, the DARAB failed to render a decision on the valuation of the land. Meantime, the titles over the properties of AFC and HPI had already been cancelled and in their place a new certificate of title was issued in the name of the Republic of the Philippines, even as far back as 9 December 1996. A period of almost 10 years has lapsed. For this reason, there is no dispute that this case has truly languished for a long period of time, the delay being mainly attributable to both official inaction and indecision, particularly on the determination of the amount of just compensation, to the detriment of AFC and HPI, which to date, have yet to be fully compensated for the properties which are already in the hands of farmer-beneficiaries, who, due to the lapse of time, may have already converted or sold the land awarded to them.

Verily, these two cases could have been disposed with dispatch were it not for LBPs counsel causing unnecessary delay. At the inception of this case, DARAB, an agency of the DAR which was commissioned by law to determine just compensation, sat on the cases for three years, which was the reason that AFC and HPI filed the cases before the RTC. We underscore the pronouncement of the RTC that "the delay by DARAB in the determination of just compensation could only mean the reluctance of the Department of Agrarian Reform and the Land Bank of the Philippines to pay the claim of just compensation by corporate landowners."

To allow the taking of landowners properties, and to leave them empty-handed while government withholds compensation is undoubtedly oppressive. [Emphasis supplied.]

These statements cannot but be true today as they were when we originally decided the case and awarded 12% interest on the balance of the just compensation due. While the petitioners were undisputedly mistaken in initially seeking recourse through the DAR, this agency itself hence, the government committed a graver transgression when it failed to act at all on the petitioners complaints for determination of just compensation.

In sum, in a balancing of the attendant delay-related circumstances of this case, delay should be laid at the doorsteps of the government, not at the petitioners. We conclude, too, that the government should not be allowed to exculpate itself from this delay and should suffer all the consequences the delay caused.

The LBPs arguments on the applicability of cases imposing 12% interest

The LBP claims in its Comment that our rulings in Republic v. Court of Appeals,26cra1aw Reyes v. National Housing Authority,27cra1aw and Land Bank of the Philippines v. Imperial,28cra1aw cannot be applied to the present case.

According to the LBP, Republic is inapplicable because, first, the landowners in Republic remained unpaid, notwithstanding the fact that the award for just compensation had already been fixed by final judgment; in the present case, the Court already acknowledged that "pertinent amounts" were deposited in favor of the landowners within 14 months from the filing of their complaint. Second, while Republic involved an ordinary expropriation case, the present case involves expropriation for agrarian reform. Finally, the just compensation in Republic remained unpaid notwithstanding the finality of judgment, while the just compensation in the present case was immediately paid in full after LBP received a copy of the Courts resolution

We find no merit in these assertions.

As we discussed above, the "pertinent amounts" allegedly deposited by LBP were mere partial payments that amounted to a measly 5% of the actual value of the properties expropriated. They could be the basis for the immediate taking of the expropriated property but by no stretch of the imagination can these nominal amounts be considered "pertinent" enough to satisfy the full requirement of just compensation i.e., the full and fair equivalent of the expropriated property, taking into account its income potential and the foregone income lost because of the immediate taking.

We likewise find no basis to support the LBPs theory that Republic and the present case have to be treated differently because the first involves a "regular" expropriation case, while the present case involves expropriation pursuant to the countrys agrarian reform program. In both cases, the power of eminent domain was used and private property was taken for public use. Why one should be different from the other, so that the just compensation ruling in one should not apply to the other, truly escapes us. If there is to be a difference, the treatment of agrarian reform expropriations should be stricter and on a higher plane because of the governments societal concerns and objectives. To be sure, the government cannot attempt to remedy the ills of one sector of society by sacrificing the interests of others within the same society.

Finally, we note that the finality of the decision (that fixed the value of just compensation) in Republic was not a material consideration for the Court in awarding the landowners 12% interest. The Court, in Republic, simply affirmed the RTC ruling imposing legal interest on the amount of just compensation due. In the process, the Court determined that the legal interest should be 12% after recognizing that the just compensation due was effectively a forbearance on the part of the government. Had the finality of the judgment been the critical factor, then the 12% interest should have been imposed from the time the RTC decision fixing just compensation became final. Instead, the 12% interest was imposed from the time that the Republic commenced condemnation proceedings and "took" the property.

The LBP additionally asserts that the petitioners erroneously relied on the ruling in Reyes v. National Housing Authority. The LBP claims that we cannot apply Reyes because it involved just compensation that remained unpaid despite the finality of the expropriation decision. LBPs point of distinction is that just compensation was immediately paid in the present case upon the Courts determination of the actual value of the expropriated properties. LBP claims, too, that in Reyes, the Court established that the refusal of the NHA to pay just compensation was unfounded and unjustified, whereas the LBP in the present case clearly demonstrated its willingness to pay just compensation. Lastly, in Reyes, the records showed that there was an outstanding balance that ought to be paid, while the element of an outstanding balance is absent in the present case.

Contrary to the LBPs opinion, the imposition of the 12% interest in Reyes did not depend on either the finality of the decision of the expropriation court, or on the finding that the NHAs refusal to pay just compensation was unfounded and unjustified. Quite clearly, the Court imposed 12% interest based on the ruling in Republic v. Court of Appeals that "x x x if property is taken for public use before compensation is deposited with the court having jurisdiction over the case, the final compensation must include interest[s] on its just value to be computed from the time the property is taken to the time when compensation is actually paid or deposited with the court. In fine, between the taking of the property and the actual payment, legal interest[s] accrue in order to place the owner in a position as good as (but not better than) the position he was in before the taking occurred."29cra1aw This is the same legal principle applicable to the present case, as discussed above.

While the LBP immediately paid the remaining balance on the just compensation due to the petitioners after this Court had fixed the value of the expropriated properties, it overlooks one essential fact from the time that the State took the petitioners properties until the time that the petitioners were fully paid, almost 12 long years passed. This is the rationale for imposing the 12% interest in order to compensate the petitioners for the income they would have made had they been properly compensated for their properties at the time of the taking.

Finally, the LBP insists that the petitioners quoted our ruling in Land Bank of the Philippines v. Imperial out of context. According to the LBP, the Court imposed legal interest of 12% per annum only after December 31, 2006, the date when the decision on just compensation became final.

The LBP is again mistaken. The Imperial case involved land that was expropriated pursuant to Presidential Decree No. 27,30cra1aw and fell under the coverage of DAR Administrative Order (AO) No. 13.31cra1aw This AO provided for the payment of a 6% annual interest if there is any delay in payment of just compensation. However, Imperial was decided in 2007 and AO No. 13 was only effective up to December 2006. Thus, the Court, relying on our ruling in the Republic case, applied the prevailing 12% interest ruling to the period when the just compensation remained unpaid after December 2006. It is for this reason that December 31, 2006 was important, not because it was the date of finality of the decision on just compensation.

The 12% Interest Rate and the Chico-Nazario Dissent

To fully reflect the concerns raised in this Courts deliberations on the present case, we feel it appropriate to discuss the Justice Minita Chico-Nazarios dissent from the Courts December 4, 2009 Resolution.

While Justice Chico-Nazario admitted that the petitioners were entitled to the 12% interest, she saw it appropriate to equitably reduce the interest charges from P1,331,124,223.05 to P400,000,000.00. In support of this proposal, she enumerated various cases where the Court, pursuant to Article 1229 of the Civil Code,32cra1aw equitably reduced interest charges.

We differ with our esteemed colleagues views on the application of equity.

While we have equitably reduced the amount of interest awarded in numerous cases in the past, those cases involved interest that was essentially consensual in nature, i.e., interest stipulated in signed agreements between the contracting parties. In contrast, the interest involved in the present case "runs as a matter of law and follows as a matter of course from the right of the landowner to be placed in as good a position as money can accomplish, as of the date of taking."33chanroblesvirtuallawlibrary

Furthermore, the allegedly considerable payments made by the LBP to the petitioners cannot be a proper premise in denying the landowners the interest due them under the law and established jurisprudence. If the just compensation for the landholdings is considerable, this compensation is not undue because the landholdings the owners gave up in exchange are also similarly considerable AFC gave up an aggregate landholding of 640.3483 hectares, while HPIs gave up 805.5308 hectares. When the petitioners surrendered these sizeable landholdings to the government, the incomes they gave up were likewise sizeable and cannot in any way be considered miniscule. The incomes due from these properties, expressed as interest, are what the government should return to the petitioners after the government took over their lands without full payment of just compensation. In other words, the value of the landholdings themselves should be equivalent to the principal sum of the just compensation due; interest is due and should be paid to compensate for the unpaid balance of this principal sum after taking has been completed. This is the compensation arrangement that should prevail if such compensation is to satisfy the constitutional standard of being "just."

Neither can LBPs payment of the full compensation due before the finality of the judgment of this Court justify the reduction of the interest due them. To rule otherwise would be to forget that the petitioners had to wait twelve years from the time they gave up their lands before the government fully paid the principal of the just compensation due them. These were twelve years when they had no income from their landholdings because these landholdings have immediately been taken; no income, or inadequate income, accrued to them from the proceeds of compensation payment due them because full payment has been withheld by government.

If the full payment of the principal sum of the just compensation is legally significant at all under the circumstances of this case, the significance is only in putting a stop to the running of the interest due because the principal of the just compensation due has been paid. To close our eyes to these realities is to condone what is effectively a confiscatory action in favor of the LBP.

That the legal interest due is now almost equivalent to the principal to be paid is not per se an inequitable or unconscionable situation, considering the length of time the interest has remained unpaid almost twelve long years. From the perspective of interest income, twelve years would have been sufficient for the petitioners to double the principal, even if invested conservatively, had they been promptly paid the principal of the just compensation due them. Moreover, the interest, however enormous it may be, cannot be inequitable and unconscionable because it resulted directly from the application of law and jurisprudence standards that have taken into account fairness and equity in setting the interest rates due for the use or forebearance of money.

If the LBP sees the total interest due to be immense, it only has itself to blame, as this interest piled up because it unreasonably acted in its valuation of the landholdings and consequently failed to promptly pay the petitioners. To be sure, the consequences of this failure i.e., the enormity of the total interest due and the alleged financial hemorrhage the LBP may suffer should not be the very reason that would excuse it from full compliance. To so rule is to use extremely flawed logic. To so rule is to disregard the question of how the LBP, a government financial institution that now professes difficulty in paying interest at 12% per annum, managed the funds that it failed to pay the petitioners for twelve long years.

It would be utterly fallacious, too, to argue that this Court should tread lightly in imposing liabilities on the LBP because this bank represents the government and, ultimately, the public interest. Suffice it to say that public interest refers to what will benefit the public, not necessarily the government and its agencies whose task is to contribute to the benefit of the public. Greater public benefit will result if government agencies like the LBP are conscientious in undertaking its tasks in order to avoid the situation facing it in this case. Greater public interest would be served if it can contribute to the credibility of the governments land reform program through the conscientious handling of its part of this program.

As our last point, equity and equitable principles only come into full play when a gap exists in the law and jurisprudence.34cra1aw As we have shown above, established rulings of this Court are in place for full application to the present case. There is thus no occasion for the equitable consideration that Justice Chico-Nazario suggested.

The Amount Due the Petitioners as Just Compensation

As borne by the records, the 12% interest claimed is only on the difference between the price of the expropriated lands (determined with finality to be P1,383,179,000.00) and the amount of P411,769,168.32 already paid to the petitioners. The difference between these figures amounts to the remaining balance of P971,409,831.68 that was only paid on May 9, 2008.

As above discussed, this amount should bear interest at the rate of 12% per annum from the time the petitioners properties were taken on December 9, 1996 up to the time of payment. At this rate, the LBP now owes the petitioners the total amount of One Billion Three Hundred Thirty-One Million One Hundred Twenty-Four Thousand Two Hundred Twenty-Three and 05/100 Pesos (P1,331,124,223.05), computed as follows:chanroblesvirtualawlibrary

Just Compensation P971,409,831.68

Legal Interest from 12/09/1996

To 05/09/2008 @ 12%/annum

12/09/1996 to 12/31/1996 23 days 7,345,455.17

01/01/1997 to 12/31/2007 11 years 1,282,260,977.82

01/01/2008 to 05/09/2008 130 days 41,517,790.07

P1,331,124,223.0535chanroblesvirtuallawlibrary

The Immutability of Judgment Issue

As a rule, a final judgment may no longer be altered, amended or modified, even if the alteration, amendment or modification is meant to correct what is perceived to be an erroneous conclusion of fact or law and regardless of what court, be it the highest Court of the land, rendered it.36cra1aw In the past, however, we have recognized exceptions to this rule by reversing judgments and recalling their entries in the interest of substantial justice and where special and compelling reasons called for such actions.

Notably, in San Miguel Corporation v. National Labor Relations Commission,37cra1aw Galman v. Sandiganbayan,38cra1aw Philippine Consumers Foundation v. National Telecommunications Commission,39cra1aw and Republic v. de los Angeles,40cra1aw we reversed our judgment on the second motion for reconsideration, while in Vir-Jen Shipping and Marine Services v. National Labor Relations Commission,41cra1aw we did so on a third motion for reconsideration. In Cathay Pacific v. Romillo42cra1aw and Cosio v. de Rama,43cra1aw we modified or amended our ruling on the second motion for reconsideration. More recently, in the cases of Munoz v. Court of Appeals,44cra1aw Tan Tiac Chiong v. Hon. Cosico,45cra1aw Manotok IV v. Barque,46cra1aw and Barnes v. Padilla,47cra1aw we recalled entries of judgment after finding that doing so was in the interest of substantial justice. In Barnes, we said:chanroblesvirtualawlibrary

x x x Phrased elsewise, a final and executory judgment can no longer be attacked by any of the parties or be modified, directly or indirectly, even by the highest court of the land.

However, this Court has relaxed this rule in order to serve substantial justice considering (a) matters of life, liberty, honor or property, (b) the existence of special or compelling circumstances, (c) the merits of the case, (d) a cause not entirely attributable to the fault or negligence of the party favored by the suspension of the rules, (e) a lack of any showing that the review sought is merely frivolous and dilatory, and (f) the other party will not be unjustly prejudiced thereby.

Invariably, rules of procedure should be viewed as mere tools designed to facilitate the attainment of justice. Their strict and rigid application, which would result in technicalities that tend to frustrate rather than promote substantial justice, must always be eschewed. Even the Rules of Court reflects this principle. The power to suspend or even disregard rules can be so pervasive and compelling as to alter even that which this Court itself had already declared to be final.48cra1aw [Emphasis supplied.]

That the issues posed by this case are of transcendental importance is not hard to discern from these discussions. A constitutional limitation, guaranteed under no less than the all-important Bill of Rights, is at stake in this case: how can compensation in an eminent domain be "just" when the payment for the compensation for property already taken has been unreasonably delayed? To claim, as the assailed Resolution does, that only private interest is involved in this case is to forget that an expropriation involves the government as a necessary actor. It forgets, too, that under eminent domain, the constitutional limits or standards apply to government who carries the burden of showing that these standards have been met. Thus, to simply dismiss this case as a private interest matter is an extremely shortsighted view that this Court should not leave uncorrected.

As duly noted in the above discussions, this issue is not one of first impression in our jurisdiction; the consequences of delay in the payment of just compensation have been settled by this Court in past rulings. Our settled jurisprudence on the issue alone accords this case primary importance as a contrary ruling would unsettle, on the flimsiest of grounds, all the rulings we have established in the past.

More than the stability of our jurisprudence, the matter before us is of transcendental importance to the nation because of the subject matter involved agrarian reform, a societal objective that the government has unceasingly sought to achieve in the past half century. This reform program and its objectives would suffer a major setback if the government falters or is seen to be faltering, wittingly or unwittingly, through lack of good faith in implementing the needed reforms. Truly, agrarian reform is so important to the national agenda that the Solicitor General, no less, pointedly linked agricultural lands, its ownership and abuse, to the idea of revolution.49cra1aw This linkage, to our mind, remains valid even if the landowner, not the landless farmer, is at the receiving end of the distortion of the agrarian reform program.

As we have ruled often enough, rules of procedure should not be applied in a very rigid, technical sense; rules of procedure are used only to help secure, not override, substantial justice.50cra1aw As we explained in Ginete v. Court of Appeals:51chanroblesvirtuallawlibrary

Let it be emphasized that the rules of procedure should be viewed as mere tools designed to facilitate the attainment of justice. Their strict and rigid application, which would result in technicalities that tend to frustrate rather than promote substantial justice, must always be eschewed. Even the Rules of Court reflect this principle. The power to suspend or even disregard rules can be so pervasive and compelling as to alter even that which this Court itself has already declared to be final, as we are now constrained to do in the instant case.

x x x x

The emerging trend in the rulings of this Court is to afford every party litigant the amplest opportunity for the proper and just determination of his cause, free from the constraints of technicalities. Time and again, this Court has consistently held that rules must not be applied rigidly so as not to override substantial justice.52cra1aw [Emphasis supplied.]

Similarly, in de Guzman v. Sandiganbayan,53cra1aw we had occasion to state:chanroblesvirtualawlibrary

The Rules of Court was conceived and promulgated to set forth guidelines in the dispensation of justice but not to bind and chain the hand that dispenses it, for otherwise, courts will be mere slaves to or robots of technical rules, shorn of judicial discretion. That is precisely why courts in rendering justice have always been, as they ought to be, conscientiously guided by the norm that when on the balance, technicalities take a backseat against substantive rights, and not the other way around. Truly then, technicalities, in the appropriate language of Justice Makalintal, "should give way to the realities of the situation.54cra1aw [Emphasis supplied.]

We made the same recognition in Barnes,55cra1aw on the underlying premise that a courts primordial and most important duty is to render justice; in discharging the duty to render substantial justice, it is permitted to re-examine even a final and executory judgment.

Based on all these considerations, particularly the patently illegal and erroneous conclusion that the petitioners are not entitled to 12% interest, we find that we are duty-bound to re-examine and overturn the assailed Resolution. We shall completely and inexcusably be remiss in our duty as defenders of justice if, given the chance to make the rectification, we shall let the opportunity pass.

Attorneys Fees

We are fully aware that the RTC has awarded the petitioners attorneys fees when it fixed the just compensation due and decreed that interest of 12% should be paid on the balance outstanding after the taking of the petitioners landholdings took place. The petitioners, however, have not raised the award of attorneys fees as an issue in the present motion for reconsideration. For this reason, we shall not touch on this issue at all in this Resolution.

WHEREFORE, premises considered, we GRANT the petitioners motion for reconsideration. The Court En Bancs Resolution dated December 4, 2009, as well as the Third Divisions Resolutions dated April 30, 2008 and December 19, 2007, are hereby REVERSED and SET ASIDE.

The respondent Land Bank of the Philippines is hereby ORDERED to pay petitioners Apo Fruits Corporation and Hijo Plantation, Inc. interest at the rate of 12% per annum on the unpaid balance of the just compensation, computed from the date the Government took the properties on December 9, 1996, until the respondent Land Bank of the Philippines paid on May 9, 2008 the balance on the principal amount.

Unless the parties agree to a shorter payment period, payment shall be in monthly installments at the rate of P60,000,000.00 per month until the whole amount owing, including interest on the outstanding balance, is fully paid.

Costs against the respondent Land Bank of the Philippines.

SO ORDERED.